Title: Re:make the museum– Derby Silk Mill

----

Year: 2013-2020

----

Text: 

##Goal of the project:
Co-produce a new museum of making for Derby Silk Mill
Uncover new stories and narratives
Find and engage new audiences 
Discovering new meanings for ‘making’

Derby Museums has defined its project aim for the development of the Silk Mill as:
“How might ‘make the museum of making’ at Derby Silk Mill, site of the world’s first factory – encouraging and enabling shared ownership and participation to help lead and influence the on going story of Derby and its citizens?”
 
##Description of project:
The Silk Mill in Derby, one of Derby Museums’ three museum buildings, is the site of the world’s first factory (and part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site), this is where the Lombe’s mill was founded in 1721. Derby has since had a rich industrial past and the former industrial museum, which had been located in the mill for nearly 40 years, was intended as a reflection of this history. The museum was over two of the floors of the building and filled with static exhibitions. Due to a lack of funding and a need for a new way forward, the museum closed its doors in 2011, only to be reopened in 2013 to undergo a complete transformation. In five years time the entire building will be re-imagined, re-designed and re-opened as Derby Silk Mill - Museum of Making. This project will open up the whole of the Silk Mill, creating spaces to inspire visitors and provide access to 100% of Derby Museums’ collections of making and social history. The new museum will have Derby’s communities at its heart and be co-produced with the people of Derby, creating strong narratives, connections and greater relevance and resilience as a result. The themes of the project and museum will be ‘Inspired by the Makers of the past, Made by the Makers of today, Empowering the Makers of the future’.

##Activities:
The team of the Derby Silk Mill started the regeneration project with a question about relevance, wondering what the mill means to the people of Derby and using co-production and human-centred design approaches to find out. They started asking anyone and everyone what they would do with the space in the mill in a ‘Project Lab’. The resulting ideas were drawn into themes, with contributors and audiences invited to come and organise events in the mill. There was room for any type of activity, from maker faires and exhibitions, to music events and international learning programmes. Throughout this process the museum team felt strongly that community members should be involved as citizen-curators and makers in the complete process of developing the building into a new and modern museum. 
Hannah Fox, project director, writes:
“This process was very different to traditional museum practice: for example, our curators’ professional knowledge of an object was only one part of the story, because the public’s own perception of their local history, their own interests and their emotions regarding the items were hugely relevant too.”
Phase one of regenerating the site with community members, was called Re:Make the Museum and focussed on the ground floor of the mill. Community members of all ages and backgrounds were invited to conceptualize their ideas, design them and eventually build the exhibits and displays themselves. Throughout the project a series of makers-in-residence were involved in the work, including architects, product designers and artists. 		

To structure the process of the rebuild, at the beginning of each activity or project the museum team defines a vision statement for the activity, formulated as a ‘How might we’ question. Through brainstorming at the start the team also considers how they can engage the head, heart and hands – encouraging participants to ‘think,feel and do’ throughout the process. To come to a clear idea they ask themselves questions like: Which questions or discussions do we hope to prompt? How do we guide discussions that might arise? How do we hope people will feel in the project, and when it is finished? Do we want to create a social space, a space for contemplation, or something else? Does the thing that people design actually prompt the discussion we are aiming for? 

“Head, heart, hands: make a difference” can be seen as a motto for the staff members, incorporating their focus on the wide impact they aim to have on individual community members, not only focussing on thinking, feeling or doing but including all of them, and the action perspective they offer participants: using your hands, building something. 

Naturally, the staff aims for the highest possible quality in their work, part of each project’s vision statement is quality of process (type of experience) and quality of end result (type of outcomes). The project creative lead is responsible for reaching these results. With many staff members having a background in design or making, they are well equipped to evaluate the quality of the project and to guide the process in a way that promotes the quality bar they have set. This quality can also be seen in the recently opened ‘Notice Nature, Feel Joy’ natural history gallery at the Museum & Art Gallery – co-created with volunteers and partners, and winner of a UK Collections Trust award.

A recent example of this participatory approach can be seen in the Ceramics Gallery project currently underway at the Museum & Art Gallery. The Ceramics Gallery is an exhibit that urgently needed an update. The team doesn’t have additional funding to update this exhibition, but there is staff capacity to work on it. Together with community members and design students the museum is quickly prototyping the interventions and putting them on display, using the ‘Project Lab’ approach developed in the Re:Make project and sharing progress on Twitter using #DMceramics. The prototypes are developed according to the head, heart and hands principles, questioning what people feel when they look at the way the objects are currently displayed or when they themselves use similar modern-day cups etc., and then how they would like to feel when experiencing the final exhibition. From the audiences responses, curators and others involved learn a lot about how their concepts and designs are actually being perceived and understood, reflecting on whether this is true to the vision statement in addition to developing personal narratives in the resulting interpretation. 

##First hand experiences:
Working in this type of project requires a new type of leadership and project management, says Hannah Fox, project director of the Silk Mill. The community contributors to the project are invaluable, but cannot be held responsible for the end result of their work, in the sense that are large sums of funding depending on the end results. Funders expect to see a plan that ensures the quality of the project and its outcomes, difficult when the coproduction design processes are iterative. Therefore it is as much about ensuring there is confidence by funders that the process will see high quality outputs and outcomes beyond the capital or design outcomes. For participants you have to create a safe and welcoming space for them to work in – valuing contributions and ideas but being clear together about what can be developed further against the project aims. The organisation needs to facilitate and enable positively the participants of its co-creation project.  

Collaboration and honesty are of key importance while working in a co-creative setting to ensure high quality work. Shared ownership of the vision statement and the work produced, allows for open discussion and self reflection towards the results of the work. In case of work that does not meet the staff’s quality bar, an open discussion about the aim of the project and about the work can lead to a joint conclusion to continue developing it or to take a different direction. Through collaboration and honesty, personal disappointment can be avoided and the highest quality standards can be upheld. 

Hannah Fox says that this attitude towards collaboration, shared ownership and feedback is crucial not only in the staff members or the participants, but also in artists and designers who are doing residencies. These residencies are about an exchange of knowledge, about the artist/designer reflecting on the themes and contributing to the projects, but also taking something away for their own practice. Whenever artists/designers are reluctant to prototype, engage with audiences and seek feedback, they are in fact breaking with the philosophy of Derby Museums. In that case there is a mismatch, which can lead to frustration or conflict. The team has seen this happen only a couple of times in all the residencies they have done, but it does emphasize the importance of selecting the artists and designers on their willingness to work with the methods of the museum during their residency and to learn from that experience. 

Other key experiences that will lead to improvements in phase two are:
- Communication: Both in personal communication with the different stakeholders, as with the press, it is challenging to communicate a nuanced story, mainly because there is so much work being done. Continuously following up with personal contacts and on other communication channels is important to share the complete story of the transformation.
- Volunteers: The staff has worked very hard to maintain relationships with all its volunteers, but it can be extremely time consuming. A new co-production volunteer coordinator will be assigned to focus on the relationships with volunteers (although this does not relieve the other team members of this responsibility as well). 
- Time: In co-creative projects everything takes longer than you’d think. Besides building in enough time in the project to be flexible towards participants, time pressure can also persuade staff members to take the safe route and to eliminate risks. It is the teams joint responsibility to be aware of this risk and to uphold the ambitions for the project even under a tight deadline.
- Honesty: Participants, audiences and other stakeholders respond well to honesty. People sense when you’re not. Being honest about sometimes not knowing something or having doubts, creates trust and understanding between the museum and the people who are involved in the project.  

##Why is it a best practice:
The Derby Silk Mill project by Derby Museums is inspiring as a best practice in co-creation, because the transformation of the Derby Silk Mill through the Re:Make the Museum human-centred approach is probably the most far stretching example of co-creation going on in Europe today. Using co-creation as a method to develop an entire museum, requires dedication, heart for the community, and a little bit of courage as well. 

##Description of organization:
Founded in 2012, Derby Museums Trust manage the collections and museums in Derby. The Silk Mill Industrial Museum was mothballed in 2011 as part of the transition into independent trust and following a failed funding campaign to redevelop the building. This enabled a fresh approach as a new project manager and team brought co-production and human-centred design experience to rethink how audiences and communities might be involved in actively reimagining the museum’s future.

----

Coverimage: dsmill2.jpg

----

Imageslider: 1

----

Location: Derby, United Kingdom

----

By: Derby Museums

----

Video: <iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/93511330?color=7c83de&title=0&byline=0&portrait=0" width="500" height="281" frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen allowfullscreen></iframe>

----

References: 

##Literature:
Visser, J., “The convincing transformation of the Derby Silk Mill”: http://themuseumofthefuture.com/2014/07/21/the-convincing-transformation-process-of-the-derby-silk-mill/
##Websites:
Project website for Re:Make the museum, accessed on October 19th 2015 via: http://www.derbymuseums.org/thesilkmill/
Tumblr page for Re:Make the museum, accessed on October 19th 2015 via: http://remakemuseum.tumblr.com
Video Re:Make the Museum by Owen Davies, accessed on October 19th 2015 via: https://vimeo.com/93511330
##Interviews:
Interview with Hannah Fox of Derby Museum by Robin van Westen via Skype, on October 19th 2015.
Panel session with Hannah Fox on strategy development for co-creation, during expert meeting ‘Hacking Heritage: the Audience, in Amsterdam on October 5th 2015.

----

Partners: Heritage Lottery Fund, Arts Council England Derby City Council