Title: West Side Stories

----

Year: 2011 - 2015

----

Text: 

##Goal of the project:
Foam (photography museum of Amsterdam) wanted to reach out to more diverse groups of people and introduce them to photography. The museum wanted to actively reach out to people who didn’t (or rarely) visit the museum. Foam sees it as its responsibility to make an effort to reach a wider audience than solely the visitors of the museum and get new visitor groups acquainted with the medium of photography. By opening op a location within the neighbourhood, Foam let’s go of the institutional walls and focuses on reaching a new audience within their living environment. Photography projects are by nature about looking closely, zooming in and seeing new things. Foam wanted the use these qualities to help people in the area to see their neighbourhood and their neighbours in a different light and help establish new connections between people in the area.

##Description of project:
Foam came in to contact with the social housing associations and collaboratively decided to set up a project location in the area of Nieuw-West, an area that was built in the 1960s and going through a period of extensive renovations, populated by many people who don't frequently visit museums. Within a very short time the associations provided them with an old store location and the funding to start developing activities. Foam did projects there for four years, always including the community and putting photography at the centre of the work. 

image: foam1.jpg

##Activities:
The Foam project location was located on a square with little to no liveliness or foot traffic. Before opening the location, Foam developed a photo booth that travelled through the neighbourhood. People were invited to come in and take their picture with another person from the neighbourhood. The photos that were taken of these randomly put together neighbours were placed in the windows of the empty buildings surrounding the square during the opening festivities, literally giving the neighbourhood a face.

The Foam team noticed that their regular communication channels didn’t work on this new ‘target group’. Often people didn’t have computers in their homes and didn’t speak or read Dutch. And so they went door to door, ringing doorbells and explaining to people who they were and what they did, inviting them to come in for an event or workshop. They learned not to say ‘Hello, I’m a from Foam’ but to say ‘Hello, I am from the red building around the corner, which is West Side Stories, a project from Foam, the photography museum in Amsterdam’. In the beginning people thought they were from a political party (because of Foam’s red t-shirts). But after a while the building and the red T-shirts where recognized and this method proved to be the most effective way of reaching out to people. Foam continued ringing doorbells, visiting school squares and participating in neighbourhood activities for the four years the project ran.

Foam started doing workshops for children and adults. Depending on the success of the workshop the frequency would go up or down. A few workshop examples are:

- Professional photographers that showed their work in Foam in the city centre were involved in children's workshops in the project location. 
- Each Wednesday afternoon children would gather for their weekly photography workshop. Some children came every Wednesday for four years. 
- Teenagers and elderly people were paired up and asked to interview each other, visit each other at home and take portraits of each other. 
- When certain buildings were up for renovation, old residents were asked if they still had pictures of the neighbourhood from when they first moved there. Old pictures were combined with new pictures, showing the past and the present in one frame.

The results of workshops were displayed in the window of the project location, in exhibitions in the location or on public locations like show windows. To mark the first year and a half a big billboard exhibition was set up on the square with a mixture of photographs made by local residents in the workshops and projects of Foam. Warnings that these billboards might be vandalised or trashed proved to be not valid. The public exhibitions were much appreciated by the neighbours and weren’t vandalised at all.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zbM2w6Vxjt8" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

##First hand experiences:
Lisa Kleeven, former head of education at Foam and project coordinator for West Side Stories, says that looking back, surprisingly, not having a fully developed plan was partly the reason she thinks the project was so successful. Going into the project they got their space very quickly and they had to start activities very soon. Kleeven explains that not having everything thought out in advance meant that there was room to improvise, listen to feedback and be flexible to wishes from and developments within the neighbourhood. Foam was able to adjust strategies as they went along. This was extra important because many of the regular strategies as applied in the museum didn’t work in this new environment. People didn’t have computers, didn’t speak Dutch, didn’t know what Foam was or did. The team had to be creative and improvise to still be able to reach people with their activities. By not being stuck in a plan and structure, they were flexible enough to be able to do so. 

Kleeven also says that part of the success came from taking on a very personal approach and really listening to people that came in, about what was going on in the neighbourhood and what their needs were. The Foam team kept an extensive file with contact information, interests, family members etc. on participants so they could personally invite them for activities that might interest them or their children. The team also wasn’t easily satisfied with the activities they were doing and was constantly looking for improvements, both on content and number of participants. In this way, activities evolved and became more sensitive to community needs. 

The museum space in the centre and the project location influenced each other. Programming that worked really well in the project location, such as workshops for adults or short programs that people could walk into without registration or tickets, were transferred to the city centre and are still there as part of the educational programme. Lessons learned in both locations were shared between staff members. The aim of the project was not necessarily to get people to come to Foams main location and see the exhibitions there, but to get them acquainted with the museum and the medium of photography.  Of course, by introducing the organisation in such an accessible way in the project location and carefully connecting activities to exhibitions in the city centre, people would visit the museum in the centre more easily. 

Kleeven feels that a very important success factor for the activities in the neighbourhood was that people in the neighbourhood were taken very seriously. By inviting top photographers to come there, by giving high quality workshops that were really about the medium of photography, about themes that were relevant to people, and by using high quality materials in all the (street) exhibitions, the project location reflected the quality of work that was done in the main location. Residents felt this, and appreciated Foams project all the more for it. 

##Why is it a best practice:
West Side Stories is inspiring as a best practice in co-creation, because:
Foam decided to move towards a new target audience. Seeing it as a responsibility to be a museum for all people within Amsterdam, they decided to commit to a new community by moving towards them, literally. 
Going in without a set plan, taking residents of Nieuw-West very seriously and listening to their needs, allowed the team to change plans according to whatever worked best to achieve the project's goals. The communication strategy and the planning of workshops could be developed to meet the needs of community members. 
A very personal approach and accessibility were the key factors in reaching neighbourhood residents of all ages.
High quality work was central to the project. Both in the activities that were organised as in the work that participants did, the West Side Stories location reflected the quality that Foam strives for in its central location. In that sense, residents of Nieuw-West were taken as serious as visitors of the main location. 

##Description of institution: 
Foam is all about photography. It is an internationally operating organisation based in Amsterdam. Foam informs and inspires the widest possible audience by presenting all facets of photography. They organise a range of activities, from exhibitions to publications, to debates and educational projects. Scouting and presenting young, emerging talent is one of their distinguishing activities. Many activities take place from within the Amsterdam museum, but for specific projects, Foam will also approach an international audience. The organisation wants to be more to Amsterdam and its inhabitants than just a museum on the Keizersgracht. They deliberately choose to actively take part in the community and aim to get the widest, most diverse audience possible involved in the museum and the photographic medium. The photographic image is essential to the way we visually process reality and how we communicate. Therefore, the ability to read, define and understand imagery is essential. Education is of the utmost importance to Foam: from young children and teenagers to adults and seniors. In their outreach programmes, photography has proven to be a great tool in bringing people in contact with each other, look at their surroundings and each other in a new way, and in helping people develop their own critical attitude towards photography and image making.

----

References: 

##Literature: 
West Side Stories Newspaper, published by Foam in May 2013, accessed on October 6th 2015 via: http://issuu.com/foam-magazine/docs/17-264c_west-side-stories_krant-def-web 
Peze, M.C., “Lens Hood” on Gup Magazine, accessed on October 6th 2015 via: https://www.gupmagazine.com/articles/lens-hood  

##Websites: 

Video West Side Stories, foto’s en verhalen uit Amsterdam Nieuw-West by Foam, accessed on October 6th 2015 via https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zbM2w6Vxjt8 

##Interviews: 
Interview with Lisa Kleeven by Robin van Westen via phone on August 11th 2015. Presentation with Lisa Kleeven on the West Side Stories project, during expert meeting ‘Hacking Heritage: the Audience, in Amsterdam on October 5th

----

Video: <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zbM2w6Vxjt8" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

----

Location: Amsterdam, The Netherlands

----

By: FOAM

----

Partners: Ymere and Stadgenoot (social housing associations)

----

Coverimage: foam1.png

----

Imageslider: 